---
title: SO III | A sackful of problems
author: sith_offside
date: 2013-09-18 08:40:00
layout: post
summary: David Moyes struggles to fit in as the new boss at Old Trafford. Let's look at why.
---

Seven matches into a thirty-eight match campaign, Manchester United find themselves in one big mess. Ninth in the league table, they will be up against a side who are five places above them. The fact that we fans must suffer from nerves before a home match against Southampton tells a lot about the state the team is in. Manchester United, the Premier League has discovered, is no longer invincible. They are suddenly looking frail, undecided and clueless. And rightly so, for David Moyes is indeed dragging a sackful of problems behind him now – an inheritance he must be rudely surprised to discover after they’d crowned him the new United boss.


Sir Alex Ferguson dragged the same sack behind him for more than a year, too, but he was a crafty magician who’d turned all problems invisible to his audience with a ceaseless and confident display of managerial tricks that, despite a few hitches along the way, always succeeded in the end. David Moyes, relatively speaking, is a mere apprentice stumbling in the dark. When the spotlights were turned on, he was caught trying to sneak out of the back door -with the good old sack behind him, of course. Everyone suddenly stood up and noticed, and demanded that the contents be revealed. Poor Moyes is now left with no choice but to overturn his sack and sift through all the embarrassing problems he had no hand in creating.

The most glaring problem that rolls out must be the wings. Giggs and Young must certainly be pushed down the pecking order: which leaves us with an inconsistent Nani and a limited Valencia at the top. Wilfried Zaha is untested, while Welbeck and Kagawa are out-of-place on the flanks. Who are our wingers, then? Sir Alex might have pulled off decent performances from everyone through rotation – but Moyes still needs to find out his first choice duo. Adnan Januzaj’s recent form might grab him a place against Southampton tomorrow, but can he deliver consistently?

In the middle – Carrick is steady, but we still need to find a link between defence and attack – someone who can lead the counter. Fellaini, it now seems, is more of a backup to Carrick than his partner in midfield. Anderson flatters to deceive, and Cleverley – well let’s just say that he’s excellent passing sideways and backwards. It is hard to believe that Tom Cleverley is the same guy who enchanted the audience with promises of potential a couple of years ago.

David De Gea is getting better and better, and it is perhaps fair to say that his acrobatic save had as much impact on the match as Januzaj’s brace against Sunderland. But in front of the young Spaniard, the defence has suddenly and inexplicably turned more porous than a table sponge. Forget about interceptions, Ferdinand, Jones and Vidic seem to providing assists for their opponents these days. You can put it down to age, but no one withers by a decade in one year. The sudden drop in form for both Vidic and Ferdinand is indeed frightening, for it provides Moyes with the unenviable task of mustering enough courage to replace the famous pair with Johnny Evans and Chris Smalling. Jones is yet to find himself a regular position, and perhaps can be faulted too much. On the positive side, Rafael looks good at the back, and it is perhaps fair to say that Evra is the third best performer in the team right now, behind Rooney and De Gea.

To cap it all, Robin Van Persie has seemed to lose his magic touch, like he did for a brief period of time last season. Rooney is trying his best to fill in the cracks, but RVP’s impact, or lack of it, is being sorely felt. Next in line should have been Javier Hernandez, but the manager’s bizarre preference for mess-up-the-first-touch Danny Welbeck has left the Mexican concerned on the sidelines. Scoring more goals than you’ve done last season is fine, but one must consider the amount of chances squandered, too. Welbeck must improve.

Then there come the rest of the problems. Is the team lacking self-belief? Does the manager not trust in his players? Have long will the board be lenient with Moyes? Can United pick themselves up from this? Will Rooney stay? Will Kagawa leave? Will Januzaj pen a new contract? Will we get a new signing next January? Will United stay in the top four come the end of the season?

Ah, don’t we miss the gaffer now.

These are all questions only time can answer, and as a United fan, I hope that the answers will be favourable for the Red Devils. So, let us ignore the sackful of problems for now, and stand by Moyes as he takes care of them. And let us hope that some day soon, the new magician will learn to emulate his predecessor’s old trick of making inconvenient baggage disappear.