---
layout:     post
title:      Your first sem at IIIT-H.
date:       2015-07-12 06:40:00
summary:    A word of advice for a prospective first year at IIIT-Hyderabad.
---


Dear Fresher,

Congratulations on making it to IIIT-H! After having a demanding last two to three years, you are now a part of one of the best institutions of the country, and you deserve to be here. Your worries about getting into a good college with interesting courses can be put to rest, it is quite true when they say that IIIT-H is the second best college in the country (after IIT-B) for computer science. You will find some amazing seniors and friends when you come here, and you will be as amazing as them with time, too.

College is one of the most awesome times of life, and you will soon discover why. Over the next four or five years (or even six or seven, dual degree folks!), you will make a completely different set of friends, be exposed to a vast number of career options, have experiences of a lifetime, discover yourself and your interests, mature into an adult, do crazy things you never thought you would, be influenced and inspired heavily by your seniors, make big decisions, break a ton of rules, make a thousand mistakes, date a lot, do a truckload of projects, get into internships, and, most importantly, drink a few hundred litres of a varied assortment of fruit juices. It is going to be a roller coaster of a ride, and you’ll love it.

But let me cut down the range of time here, and bring it down to about half a year. Let me tell you about a couple of things about your first semester that would will definitely help you once you’re here – stuff that I would have liked to know before I came here myself.


—

One, coding is your new best friend. 

The IIIT-Culture is completely coding oriented, with a few notable exceptions. We have a history of taking opportunities like GSoC and ACM-ICPC very seriously, and the most important part of your first year coursework will involve you banging away at your keyboard for hours. All of you will have a C programming course in your first sem, and most of you will have IT Workshop, too. Try to see if you can enjoy these courses, they really are very interesting. Spend time sincerely learning the stuff they teach – it’s really worth it, and it would be very hard to succeed later if you fare poorly in these courses.  In fact, I’d strongly suggest that you start learning about programming in C over the next two weeks before you join college. Pick up a book like Kernighan and Ritchie or go over to YouTube and start straightaway. As for a compiler, use online IDEs like the one on CodeChef for now. Once you’re here, you’ll be converted into a Linux user and will learn to use the terminal.

—

Two, participate in fresher activities.

Once you’re in college, you will realize that we have a very student-driven community here. Your seniors will be the one doing your registrations, they will be the one helping you ease into college life, they will be the ones introducing you to life on campus. In the first couple of months, we’ll organizing a lot of activities for you like the Fresher’s Night, Treasure Hunts, inter-house sports and cultural competitions, all-batch talks, club-introduction sessions and even batch trips to the major tourist spots across the city. This is a great opportunity for you to have fun and meet your batchmates and your seniors, and the only opportunity, in fact. We all get busy later on, and will just become faces you see while walking down the road to class every morning. We don’t need to, but we put a lot of time and effort into these activities, and it is the only opportunity you’ll have to interact with us seniors and most of your batchmates, so participate in the fresher activities in the first couple of months. There will lazy bums and ‘uninterested’ folks among you lot who will never turn up for anything – don’t blame the seniors if they are largely uninterested in you later on for disrespecting their intentions and efforts.

—

Three, interact as much as you can with seniors and batchmates.

This is more like an extension to the previous point, yes, but I’d like to emphasize on one more aspect of the same. In your first couple of months, you will be having lots of healthy interactions with your seniors. They will show a lot of interest in you, ask you about your interests and accomplishments, ensure you are not isolating yourself in the new environment and so on. Now we have a whole selected bodies of seniors called the Apex and the Mentor Body who will keep in touch with you individually and ensure that these interactions stay healthy, so you don’t need to be apprehensive of these interactions. We strongly believe that they are to help you out, to let you meet the game designers, the algorithmic coders, the developers, the singers, the football buddies, the foodies and prospective great friends. By the end of your first year, you’ll be having friends across all batches, and this is how you start. Also, make sure that your first few weeks at college involve you barging into batchmates’ rooms and finding new friends, too. The point I’m trying to make is, don’t stop interacting with seniors out of fear or your batchmates out of shyness. Make an active effort to meet as many new people as you can, you won’t have time later on.

—

Four, don’t mess up attendance on PT/Yoga.

One of the peculiar things in your first sem will be early morning PT/Yoga. Every day by 6.30am you need to be at the football ground for your one-hour PT sessions, and you need to attend for at least 40-45 days to pass PT. (Ones with Yoga will have to attend minimum 20 yoga classes and 25 PT classes). In your second sem, you need to clock another 40-45 days to pass, again. There will be no PT/Yoga second year onwards, but f you fail it the first sem, you will have to attend a similar number of days in your second year. If you fail again, you will have to drop courses and stay for an extra semester in college to finish it. You don’t want to end up in that scenario, so keep in mind that both the PT and Yoga folks are very strict disciplinarians and will fail you if you’re short by even a couple of days. Respect PT & Yoga, and finish them off as quickly as you can.

These are just a couple of things I wanted to mention, and I’m sure you’ll pick up the rest when you come to college. Please feel free to ping me or any other senior if you have any doubts or queries, we’d be happy to help. If you’re in CLD, ping me nonetheless, I’d like to know you.

Looking forward to seeing you folks in a couple of weeks, and good luck!

Sriharsh Bhyravajjula,
IInd Year, CLD.

