---
title: SO VI | Just call him 'Memphis'.
author: sith_offside
date: 2015-05-18 08:40:00
layout: post
summary: Will the #7 shirt curse of Old Trafford finally be overcome?
---


He’s quick. He’s strong. He’s tricky.  He’s lethal. And he’s on his way to Old Trafford.

Memphis Depay, who prefers to be known by his surname, is the next super-star winger in the making. After having scored 28 goals in 38 appearances for PSV Eindhoven and having won his club the Dutch title and himself the Eredivisie Golden Boot, he is now going to be a Manchester United player for a rumoured 30 million euros. For a player of his quality, that’s a bargain.


This won’t be the first time Memphis will be playing under Louis Van Gaal, having been handed a World Cup debut for Holland in the World Cup by the United manager. However, this will be the first time he would be featuring in a team playing in the Champions League, the highest level of football in the world. He would also be new to the English style of play, which many a time has been too physical and daunting for incoming foreign talent. But it shouldn’t be much of a hindrance for Memphis, whose hard work and training ethics are unparalleled, and whose ambition is to be as good as Cristiano Ronaldo one day. Here is a glimpse of what he can do:

There is a painful side to story to stardom, too. Memphis’ biological father left him early in his childhood, the reason why Memphis prefers not to be called ‘Depay’. Then came an abusive stepfather, who disappeared after winning a lottery.  Before PSV signed him, his financial situation was so dire his mother had to go hungry to buy him things. Since childhood, Depay has had to find the best of himself in order to be who he wanted to be.

But under father-like figure Louis Van Gaal, the flashy forward now has a chance to put all that behind and achieve what he wants. Next season, he will be playing at the Theatre of Dreams in front of the Stretford End faithful.  And then we will know if this Dutch kid is ready to step into the gigantic shoes of a Portugese one who once wanted to be the best in the world, and did.

We’re waiting for you, Memphis.