---
layout: post
title: Invictus
date: 2015-02-08 06:40:00
summary: On the iconic poem by William Ernest Henley.
---

Before Morgan Freeman dies,and before I die, I want my poems to be read out in his deep, inimitable and inspiring voice. This particular wish has been in my bucket list ever since I watched the 2009 movie Invictus, and ever since I heard him recite William Ernest Henley’s poem of the same name. ‘Invictus’ – a Latin word which, when translated, means ‘unconquered’. William Ernest Henley’s original poem ran thus:

***

TO R.T.H.B

Out of the night that covers me,
Black as the pit from pole to pole,
I thank whatever gods may be
For my unconquerable soul.

In the fell clutch of circumstance
I have not winced nor cried aloud.
Under the bludgeonings of chance
My head is bloody, but unbowed.

Beyond this place of wrath and tears
Looms but the Horror of the shade,
And yet the menace of the years
Finds and shall find me unafraid.

It matters not how strait the gate,
How charged with punishments the scroll,
I am the master of my fate:
I am the captain of my soul

***

Arguably William Ernest Henleys’s greatest work, this poem was written in 1875 and first published in ‘Book of Verses’ . It was much later that a British editor, who wrote under the pen name ‘Q’, gave the poem its Latin title while including it in his book ‘ The Oxford Book of English Verse 1250 -1900’. Invictus was a fitting title to the context in which it was written, too. Henley, at 17, had his leg amputed below the knee; he wrote this poem as a mark of his resilience. 

Note: R.H.T.B stands for Robert Thomas Hamilton Bruce, a literary patron.

I remember Andre Agassi quoting this poem in his autobiography. After that, a friend of mine introduced me to the movie. Released in 2009, ‘Invictus’ was based on the book ‘Playing the Enemy’ by John Carlin. It shows us how Nelson Mandela was inspired by the poem while he was imprisoned on Robben Island for 18 years. Later, he uses the same poem to inspire the South African Rugby captain, Francois Pienaar, to take his team to victory in the Rugby World Cup. 