---
title: SO V | Steven Gerrard's symbolic departure
author: sith_offside
date: 2015-03-21 08:40:00
layout: post
summary: On the cruel swansong of an Anfield legend.
---


Steven Gerrard, the man many believe to be the greatest midfielder to grace a Liverpool shirt, walked out onto his beloved Anfield ground one last time. There was a guard of honour awaiting him, his teammates on one flank, a spirited Crystal Palace team on the other. The Kop were at their singsong loudest in the background, and you would have thought that Gerrard would be getting a worthy farewell.

But despite their applause and appreciation, Alan Pardew’s Crystal Palace were no pushovers, and worked hard to earn a shock victory. They ran through the Liverpool defence with pace and guile, and ended up 1-3 winners, ensuring that the Liverpool skipper’s last home game ended in a defeat. The fact that the Crystal Palace man who scored a goal and set up another to doom Liverpool was Manchester United reject Wilfried Zaha, did not help either. The season ended on a typical note for Brendan Rodgers’ men and their captain – in irony and defeat.

Steven Gerrard has never won a Premier League title in his career. Last season promised to change that statistic, when the lethal combination of Suarez and Sturridge inspired a title charge. Ironically, their surge suffered their knockout blow with Gerrard’s iconic slip at Chelsea which allowed Demba Ba to charge through for the breakthrough, leading the Blues to a victory. Crystal Palace (ah, them again!) crushed all hopes next week with a thrilling comeback from 3-0 to draw a must-win game for Liverpool. This was meant to be a historic title for Liverpool and Gerrard, off a season in which arch-rivals Manchester United were adapting to life without Sir Alex Ferguson, arguably the greatest manager of all time and the man who’d knocked Liverpool ‘off their perch’. But the historic moment never arrived. In the meanwhile, Sir Alex had appointed fellow Scotsman David Moyes to succeed him, the latter getting sacked before the end of season after guiding his team to a lowly seventh and starving Old Trafford of Champions League football for the first time in 23 years.

City won the title, and Suarez left for the sunny fields of Camp Nou, and Liverpool have never looked like coming back to last season’s form, an array of poor signings and defensive errors miring them in a battle for fourth. Their primary objective of retaining Champions League football were squashed in Gerrard’s farewell by the very team who had killed their title hopes last season. And in their stead in the top four are a resurgent Manchester United, who have surfaced from their Moyesy depths under the reins of Dutch disciplinarian Louis Van Gaal. While Liverpool will learn to live with a Gerrard-shaped hole in midfield next season, United will be busy in the CL and in summer market, en route to regaining their place at the pinnacles of European football. The moment has been lost for Liverpool and Gerrard, and it will not come back.

Steven Gerrard’s departure is, in a way, symbolic for Liverpool. It is the end of an era for the club who will always be ruing, for some time to come, how they could never convert promise to silverware, and how Crystal Palace, at the moment when it mattered most for club and captain, managed to spoil a fairytale ending.
