---
title: SO VII | Adieu, De Gea.
author: sith_offside
date: 2015-06-15 08:40:00
layout: post
summary: Have seen the last of the iconic shot-stopper at Manchester?
---

If you type in the phrase “de gea” on Google today, the next two words in the suggestions dropdown would be “real madrid”. And that’s because the Manchester United Player of the Year is widely expected to join the Galacticos over the next few days for a measly transfer fee of around 25 million pounds. Sadly for a United fan and luckily for a Los Blancos counterpart, it makes sense from a lot of angles.

Firstly, Madrid need a keeper who is both a superstar and a world class player.

They had one, yes. After having captained Real Madrid and Spain, and after having won every major honour there is to win on  both club and international level in a long and successful career, ‘Saint’ Iker Casillas, Real’s incumbent between the posts, is no doubt one of the greatest to play for ‘Los Blancos’. But sadly, this superstar is not world-class anymore, despite his refusal to believe or accept so. Following an error riddled last two seasons highlighted by his blunders in big games, particularly in Brazil at the World Cup, the 34 year old is not exactly an embodiment of the phrase ‘aging like wine’.

Then there is Keylor Navas, who is neither a star nor a world-class player. He is neither the name on the jersey you’d buy, nor the man to win the trophies for the said jersey. Make no mistake, the Costa Rican number one had a great World Cup and put in impressive shifts when he was required to for the Galacticos, but he is nowhere close to the elegant polished product you’d expect a club of Madrid’s level to field in their starting eleven.

Rafa Benitez and Florentino Perez, the manager and the president, need a capable marquee signing to make a statement, both for their own reasons. The former, newly appointed in place of Carlo Ancelotti, needs a display of ambition to kickstart his campaign, and the latter, under pressure after rival Barca’s treble, needs to show that the club mean business.

Secondly, De Gea is the perfect match.

Not because he is best superstar keeper in the world, that credit might go to Bayern’s Manuel Neuer, but because he is the best available.

With only a year on his contract left, and United making a shaky return to Champions League football, De Gea clearly has a better chance of winning more silverware at the Santiago Bernabeu than at Old Trafford. Besides, his family is in Madrid, he was brought to Manchester from Athletico Madrid, his girlfriend has her career based in Madrid, and well, the world’s most glamourous club right now is Real Madrid. (I’ll emphasize on that word again, in case you missed it – Madrid) De Gea has already succeeded Casillas in the national team, and would love a chance to play in his own country with his Spanish teammates in front of him on club level, too. Did I mention that his agent Jorge Mendes had conducted a very similar deal for a certain Cristiano Ronaldo six years ago?

So what’s delayed this transfer so far, then? Why wasn’t this deal wrapped up earlier? Why has this transfer saga been going on for more than six months now? Why is De Gea still with United?

There are two crucial reasons for the delay of the deal.

First, though Madrid need De Gea, they will not be able to accommodate him without resolving the exit of one of their two keepers first. Casillas still has time on his contract, Navas is tied down to a long term deal, and both have expressed desire to stay and fight for their place. Neither of them will be willing to take on the role of a ‘second’ replacement. Assuming Madrid ignore their wishes, it would still be tough to move Navas (having signed him just after the WC, and him being the most ideal number two for them for the foreseeable future); and the few clubs that can afford Iker Casillas’ wages are ones which do not need him at all. If De Gea were to move, there is no guarantee he will be starting all games, given the situation. Wouldn’t it be wiser to join Madrid the next year, when he can leave on a free with a big signing on fee, and with the current situation resolved?

The second reason why this deal is taking time is because of the contrast in playing atmospheres. Real Madrid is an ambitious club with quite a demanding fanbase. For supporters who have booed their icons Ronaldo and Bale after non-terrific performances, the standards are high, and any error by the man who will have arguably ‘pushed the Saint out of the club’ will be magnified and pounced upon, and the media will mount the heat like they are wont to in Spain. If the error were to occur in a match like an El Clasico, De Gea would never be forgiven. It is a certainty that he will be under immense pressure in front of a ‘fickle’ support constantly for quite some time, and if he were to compare it to the love he currently receives from the Old Trafford faithful game in and game out, he would ask himself, is it worth it? It’s not like they are paying me more than United anyway, either?

Louis van Gaal has stated that United have offered a bumper contract to his keeper, rumoured to be a 200k/week one, but he has also stated his resignation to the fact De Gea might refuse it and opt for a move back home. The fact that we’ve lined up potential replacements is not a great sign either.

In the end it comes down to the Spaniard. It is De Gea’s choice whether he wishes to go home or make Manchester his new one instead. It is in his hands which two words will follow his name on Google a year hence, and though I have my fingers crossed and even knotted for his stay in England, I have a gut feeling that the first of those words will begin with an ‘r’ instead of an ‘m’.

Adieu, De Gea. Thanks for the memories.