---
layout:     post
title:      GSoC V | Adding thanks to normal revisions.
date:       2016-06-07 00:08:00
summary:    Subtask I | Writing a script which will be used to thank normal revisions on a wiki.
categories: GSoC Wikimedia
tags:
- gsoc
---

Now to the actual coding. I have 6 subtasks to finish in the duration of the project, and this is Subtask I[^1]. 

My job here is to add a script to pywikibot which can take a revision_id[^2] and then make a call to the ThankAPI[^3] on MediaWiki to thank that revision. Also, I need to add unittests for the same to check if the thank action was successful. Hence there are two parts to this: adding `scripts/thanks.py` for the basic script and then `scripts/thanks_tests.py`. Let's look at them one by one.

## One: The thanks.py script.

    #!/usr/bin/python
    # -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
    """
    A script which takes a revision ID on the wiki and thanks it on behalf of the user logged in.

    Syntax:

        python pwb.py thanks [rev]

    Params
     -rev: - The value of the revisionID to be thanked.

    (Start with hardcoded revision 217210 on test:test)

    I can call the Thanks API for this, which must be called by `action=thank`. It needs the params `rev`, `source` (optional),
    and token=csrf, I must get the csrf token via the Tokens API. And I must have site and user credentials working.

    """



    from __future__ import absolute_import, unicode_literals

    import pywikibot
    import requests
    # import urllib
    # import urllib2


    def thank_rev(rev_id):
        """
        Thank the given revision ID on the wiki on behalf of the user logged in.
        """
        #Login into the wiki
        site = pywikibot.Site()
        site.login()

        page=pywikibot.Page(site, {title:'Special:Log/thanks'})
        print (page.get())

        #Get csrf token from site.
        token = site.tokens['csrf']
        
        #token = token[:-2]+"%2B%5C"
        print rev_id
        print token

        #GET request (doesn't work, tokens need to be in the POST body):
        #response = urllib2.urlopen("https://test.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=thank&format=json&rev={0}&token={1}&source=diff".format(rev_id, token))
        #html = response.read()
        #print html

        #Make a POST request to thank the rev_id. (doesn't work, leading to bad token errors)
        # url = 'https://test.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=thank&format=json'
        # values = {'rev' : rev_id,
        #           'source' : 'test_thank',
        #           'token' : token }
        # data = urllib.urlencode(values)
        # req = urllib2.Request(url, data)
        # response = urllib2.urlopen(req)
        # html = response.read()
        # print html

        #Using requests to make GET or POST requests instead of urlib2
        #r = requests.get("https://test.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=thank&format=json&rev={0}&token={1}&source=diff".format(rev_id, token))
        values = {'rev' : rev_id,
                  'source' : 'test_thank',
                  'token' : token }
        r = requests.post("https://test.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=thank&format=json", data=values)
        print (r.text)



    def main(*args):
        """
        Proces command line arguments and thank the rev
        """

        # Process the args
        local_args = pywikibot.handle_args(args)
        for arg in local_args:
            option, sep, value = arg.partition(':')
            if option == '-rev':
                rev_id = int(value)

        #Call the thank method
        thank_rev(rev_id)


    if __name__ == "__main__":
        main()

Edit: This code has been modified a lot. Firstly, I have removed the direct API call, since it is a practice in pywikibot to make all API calls via `pywikibot/site.py`. So I've added a method in site.py which calls the API given the revision_id, and then called this method in thanks.py. And then I have also added in a `User.thanks_enabled` property which lets me check if the particular user __can__ indeed be thanked. (Anonymous users can't). `pywikibot/site.py` always makes a POST request if tokens are involved.

## Two: The thanks_tests.py script.

This has been added to tests/ and uses unittests[^4]. This was after reading up on two other scripts: `tests/README.rst`[^5] and `tests/add_text_tests.py`[^6]. It's just a design, and needs to be finalized. 

    # -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
    """Test suite for the thanks script"""
    #
    # (C) Pywikibot team, 2016
    #
    from __future__ import absolute_import, unicode_literals

    __version__ = '$Id: 27c941f3adf07987aeeb0a30c4428fc4290e26a5 $'

    import pywikibot

    from scripts.thanks import thank_rev

    from tests.aspects import unittest, TestCase

    class TestThankedRevs(TestCase):

        """ Test if the revisions are being thanked """

        family = 'wikipedia'
        code= 'en'

        dry = true #should this be simulate = true?

        def test_logging_enabled_rev(self):
            """Test if the thank action works for users with logging enabled"""

            #The design of the following method:
            # thank_rev(*some rev id*)
            # thank_user_iD = "User whose revision is being thanked, and who has thanks enabled"
            # thank_user = getUserfromId(thank_user_iD)

            # if thank_user.thanks_enabled:
            #     page = Special:Log/thanks
            #     self.assert("revision present in page")

        def test_logging_disabled_rev(self):
            """Test if the thank action works for users with logging disabled"""

            #Design
            #The design of the following method:
            # thank_rev(*some rev id*)
            # thank_user_iD = "User whose revision is being thanked, and who has thanks enabled"
            # thank_user = getUserfromId(thank_user_iD)

            # if (!thank_user.thanks_enabled):
            #      what now? 

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        unittest.main()

Edit: This 'design' has been revised and implemented, too. Firstly, logging is always enabled by the server, so every thank action will always get logged, hence there is no need for two methods. I have removed these two methods, and replaced them with one which extracts a change from recentchanges, and then checks log before and after thanking it to see if any changes have been made. Unit tests have nice assert statements which make such tests work. I'll update the code later.


***

[^1]: See the corresponding Phabricator task [here](https://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T135409)
[^2]: Read about the Revision Table and its components [here](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Manual:Revision_table#rev_id)
[^3]: Read up on the Thanks Extension and API [here](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:Thanks)
[^4]: [Here](https://jeffknupp.com/blog/2013/12/09/improve-your-python-understanding-unit-testing/) is a brief introduction to unittests.
[^5]: [This](https://git.wikimedia.org/blob/pywikibot%2Fcore.git/master/tests%2FREADME.rst) README is an intro to how tests work in Pywikibot.
[^6]: `tests/add_text_tests.py` is the test suite for the script `scripts/add_text.py`. Take a look at the code [here](https://git.wikimedia.org/blob/pywikibot%2Fcore.git/master/tests%2Fadd_text_tests.py)