---
layout:     post
title:      GSoC III | Wiki, MediaWiki and Pywikibot.
date:       2016-05-18 00:10:00
summary:    An overview of what a wiki is and how wikis are generated by wiki engines like MediaWiki, followed by an introduction to the Python based client program Pywikibot. The post ends with an explanation of how Pywikibot interacts with MediaWiki, and how to get started with it.
categories: GSoC Wikimedia
tags:
- gsoc
---

<!-- _I'll start with a disclaimer: this post may not be technically accurate. I might have gotten one or more terms wrong, I might have misunderstood the workflow somewhere, or I might have erred with my explanation of what I understood. But I have tried my best to be factual, and my knowledge is directly derived from docs at [Manual:Pywikibot](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Manual:Pywikibot) and all the innumerable footnote references I have inserted into the text._ -->

To understand Pywikibot, some background knowledge is necessary, so first let's see what wikis and wiki engines are.

## What is a wiki?

The word _wiki_ means 'quick' in Hawaiian. __A wiki[^1] is a basically a website, whose contents and source can be edited collaboratively from a web browser itself__. A wiki typically keeps a version history for each editable page, and is often editable by any visitor to the site. Users are usually associated with accounts and permissions, and, in a typical wiki, write text using a simplified markup language[^2]. The internet is full of wikis - the most popular one being Wikipedia[^3].

Ward Cunningham[^4], developer of the first wiki software _WikiWikiWeb_[^5] in 1995, is widely known as the inventor of the wiki, and he'd described it as "the simplest online database that could possibly work". Here is the essence of the 'Wiki concept', as described by Ward Cunningham and [Bo Leuf]() in their book _The Wiki Way: Quick Collaboration on the Web_[^6]:

  * A wiki invites all users to edit any page or to create new pages within the wiki Web site, using only a plain-vanilla Web browser without any extra add-ons.
  * Wiki promotes meaningful topic associations between different pages by making page link creation almost intuitively easy and showing whether an intended target page exists or not.
  * A wiki is not a carefully crafted site for casual visitors. Instead, it seeks to involve the visitor in an ongoing process of creation and collaboration that constantly changes the Web site landscape.

You can continue to read more about wikis [here](), but for now we enough to move on.

***

## What is a wiki engine?

__A wiki engine (or wiki software/application) is the software which powers wiki websites__. Collaborative in nature, wiki engines[^7] are web-content management systems which run on one or more web servers and allow multiple users to create and collaboratively edit wiki pages or entries via the browser. The content of the wiki, along with user details and revision histories for the wiki components, are stored in file systems or databases on the wiki engine servers. 

There are many popular actively maintained wiki engines varying in the porgramming language they're written in, the platforms they're built for, whether they're open source or proprietary, the amount of features they offer, their philosophies of collaboration, whether they're meant for public, enterprise or personal use and whether they allow scripting calls for their wikis.

***

## MediaWiki

__MediaWiki is nothing but a wiki engine.__

MediaWiki[^8] was developed by [Magnus Manske]() and [Lee Daniel Crocker]() in 2001-02. It is an open source wiki engine, written in PHP with a backend database. It is primarily by the Wikimedia Foundation[^9] for their project websites - the most notable one being Wikipedia. Mediawiki is the most popular wiki engine used, and is optimized to handle large projects having terabytes of content. There are more than 2000 extensions available for adding different features to MediaWiki, and it available in 202 languages. 

Mediawiki provides for access to the wikis it generates over HTTP via URLs (usually at api.php?), thanks to the __Mediawiki action API__. The action API[^10] is simply a web-service which allows for access to wiki features, data and meta-data. Clients request particular "actions" by specifying an `action` parameter, mainly `action=query` to get information. The MediaWiki action API can be used to monitor a MediaWiki installation, or create a bot to automatically maintain one. It provides direct, high-level access to the data contained in MediaWiki databases. 

Client programs[^11] can log in to a wiki, get data, and post changes automatically by making HTTP requests to the MediaWiki API. Client programs are numerous in nature, and have been written in C++, Javascript, Go, Awk, Perl and so on.

***

## Pywikibot

Pywikibot is one such Python-based client program which interacts with the MediaWiki API.

"Pywikibot is a Python library and collection of tools that automate work on MediaWiki sites. Originally designed for Wikipedia, it is now used throughout the Wikimedia Foundation's projects and on many other MediaWiki wikis."[^12]

***

[^1]:
[^2]: 
[^3]:
[^4]:
[^5]:
[^6]: 
[^7]:
[^8]:
[^9]:
[^10]: 
[^11]:
[^12]: