---
layout:     post
title:      GSoC VI | Adding thanks to Flow comments.
date:       2016-06-17 00:08:00
summary:    Subtask II | Writing a script which will thank comments on a Flow Board
categories: GSoC Wikimedia
tags:
- gsoc
---

Subtask II. Let's talk about Flow. 

Much like Thanks, Flow[^1] is a MediaWiki extension. It "provides a new discussion and collaboration system for Talk pages", where 'Talk'[^2] pages are discussion spaces associated with every wiki page. Talk pages are wiki pages themselves, but reserved or preferred for the purpose of interacting with other users regarding the associated page. You can try using Flow [here](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Talk:Sandbox).

Now, Flow pages are known as 'Boards', and each Board[^3] is made up of 'Topics' of discussion, which consist of 'Posts'. These posts can be thanked by logged in users, and it is my job to write a script which can do the same, thanking a post given its post_id[^4].

First, I'll be writing a script which calls a method in `pywikibot/site.py`, which in turn calls the Thanks API for Flow[^5]. This API call will be given a post id, and it will thank the comment. I would have to write unit tests for the same, too.

## One: The flow_thanks.py code.

Here, the approach was pretty similar to thanks.py (read the last post, especially the edits). Instead of accepting a revision_id, I accepted a post_id, instead. And instead of making an 'action=thank' API call, I made an 'action=flowthank' API call via site.py.
Another key difference between this code and thanks for normal revs was accessing the User.thanks_enabled property[^6]. Here, it is very lengthy and complicated to extract the user_id for accessing `page.py`'s thanks_enabled property, and I don't know if it is possible in the end, so we have excluded it all.

    #!/usr/bin/python
    # -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
    """
    A script which takes a post ID on a Flow Board and thanks it on behalf of the
    user logged in.

    Syntax:     python pwb.py thanks -flow_post:[post_id]

    @params;

     -flow_post:  The value of the postID to be thanked.

    """
    from __future__ import absolute_import, unicode_literals

    import pywikibot

    def thank_flow_post(post_id):
        """
        Thank the given Post ID on a Flow Board on behalf of the user logged in.
        """
        #Login into the side
        site = pywikibot.Site()
        site.login()

        #Make Thank API call to site, and print result
        result = site.thank_flowpost(post_id)
        print result


    def main(*args):
        """
        Proces command line arguments and thank the post
        """
        local_args = pywikibot.handle_args(args)
        for arg in local_args:
            option, sep, value = arg.partition(':')
            if option == '-flow_post':
                post_id = value
                thank_flow_post(post_id)


    if __name__ == "__main__":
        main()


## Two: The flow_thanks_tests.py code.

These tests are more complicated than their counterparts for normal revisions. Firstly, because recentchanges()[^7] does not list out post_ids like it does for revision_ids, so we can't extract the most recent flow post so easily. Secondly, because we have to extract a custom Flow board, then extract Topics under this Board, and then their posts. The fact that the Topics have to extracted from a generator[^8] makes it a little bit ugly. And thirdly, there is one weird post in between which throws up an error while being generated from the generator, and fails the tests. I temporarily used Exception handling[^9] to take care of it, but it needs a more elegant solution. 

    # -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
    """Test suite for the flow based thanks script."""
    #
    # (C) Pywikibot team, 2016
    #
    # Distributed under the terms of the MIT license.
    #
    from __future__ import absolute_import, unicode_literals

    import pywikibot

    from scripts.flow_thanks import thank_flow_post
    from pywikibot.flow import Board, Topic, Post

    from tests.aspects import unittest, TestCase


    class TestFlowThank(TestCase):

        """Test thanks for revisions."""

        family = 'test'
        code = 'test'

        def test_topic (self):
            """
            Method to test thanks for a Flow post

            Note: This approach requires a new topic and flow post to be added atop
            the Talk:Sandbox page between reruns, and will fail otherwise.
            Alternatively, one could devise a method to use the post_ids list
            in a better way.
                   
            """

            # A list which will store ids of posts from Talk:Sandbox, which can be
            # thanked.
            post_ids = []
            site = pywikibot.Site()

            # Getting the 'Talk:Sandbox' flow page on test:test
            page = Board(self.site, 'Talk:Sandbox')

            # Getting the a generator for topics on that page.
            topics_list = page.topics(limit=5)

            # The exception handling feature has been added to deal with the
            # anomalous nature of 'Topic:Sel4ipu6maqlbm0d' which throws up a error.
            # TODO: Fix the above.
            try:
                # Extracting each topic, and then the posts in each topic,
                # and then appending these post_ids to a list.
                for topic in topics_list:
                    post_list = topic.replies()
                    for post in post_list:
                        post_ids.append(post.uuid)
            except Exception as a:
                pass

            # Checking log before the thanks action
            log_initial = site.logevents(logtype='thanks', total=1)
            for x in log_initial:
                initial_id = x.logid()

            # Thanking the most recent post on Talk:Sandbox
            thank_flow_post(post_ids[0])

            # Checking log for new thanks, and then comparing with earlier log.
            log_final = site.logevents(logtype='thanks', total=1)
            for x in log_final:
                final_id = x.logid()

            # Asserting that the ids are unequal, implying a successful
            # thanks action.
            self.assertNotEqual(initial_id, final_id)

    if __name__ == "__main__":
        unittest.main()


The rest of the code is the same. Once you have the post_id, you thank the flow post before and after the most recent thanks log_id is extracted and compared using our friendly assert methods. And voila, we have the unit tests chugging along.

***

[^1]: Read up on the extension [here](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:Flow)
[^2]: Read about Talk pages [here](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Help:Talk_pages)
[^3]: If you're gonna try it anyway, you might as well know the proper [Nomenclature.](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Help:Flow/Nomenclature)
[^4]: Each post on a flow page is associated with a unique id. Look at the URLS of the 'reply or 'thank' links under a comment, and you'll see the post id in the link.
[^5]: You should look at the parameters and an example of the API call [here](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:Thanks#Flow_Thanks)
[^6]: This is actually a Subtask later on, but for now we are implementing a @property in page.py under the User class, which will return a boolean value stating whether or not the user object can be thanked.
[^7]: Special Pages are a can of worms. You must see for yourself what [this](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Help:Recent_changes) particluar one is.
[^8]: First search [result](https://wiki.python.org/moin/Generators) off Google for python generators - that is how I learnt.
[^9]: You can't go far in Python without knowing how to catch an Error or handle Exceptions. Read [on](https://wiki.python.org/moin/HandlingExceptions).
