---
layout:     post
title:      GSoC I | What is Google Summer of Code?
date:       2016-05-07 07:21:29
summary:    Selected for GSoC. At Wikimedia :D | Implementing Pywikibot support for the Thanks extension
categories: GSoC Wikimedia
tags:
- gsoc
---

Google Summer of Code[^1], or GSoC, is an open source development program conducted every summer by Google. Open source organisations which wish to participate in this program send in proposals, and 150 odd ones are selected every year as mentoring organisations, having projects which need contributions. GSoC aspirants apply to these orgs and, if selected, get paid (quite handsomely) to work on projects at these orgs over summer.  GSoC is one of the world's best opportunities for an aspiring developer to challenge himself or herself and learn how to be a technical part of an organisation.

This summer, my project proposal[^2] at the Wikimedia Foundation was selected for GSoC. :D

Here's how.

---

Why Wikimedia?[^3] Well, because of [@polybuildr](https://github.com/polybuildr), my friend at college. Inspired by the romantic descriptions of his own GSoC experiences at WMF, and moved by his passionate description of the community at WMF, I'd decided in early December itself that I'd contribute to WMF, too. Or rather, the open source source software package written for WMF - MediaWiki. In the first week of March, once the org list for GSoC was out - I'd breifly flirted with the idea of shifting to The Indic Project, since I am stuying Computational Linguistics and they had some interesting NLP projects. But I liked WMF more, so I moved back soon. Since I was more comfortable with python than I was with PHP, I'd chosen to contribute to pywikibot in Mediawiki.

I'd started work back in early November itself. Setting up the environment was a frustrating process. There seemed to be so many places where you needed to set up an account first. (Wikitech Labs, MediaWiki, Wikipedia are enough - a Wikitech Labs account means you have developer access, afaik). Then you needed to setup an account on Gerrit with the necessary SSH keys, so you could use Git to submit patches to their code. This was an issue, since the college proxy had blocked the SSH ports[^4]. Then I had to use my Mediawiki credentials to setup an account on Phabricator[^5]. Along with this, you needed to have the LAMP stack installed on your system, so that you could create a local instace of a wiki. And then, as I went along, I had to have the necessary testing environment[^6] for the code, too. Needless to say, you needed an online IRC[^7] presence on freenode, with #mediawiki being the primary channel for lurking/participation (I personally had to stick to #pywikibot). And this is before one gets started with the enormous amount of documentation. 

All this took me quite a while to understand and get to terms with, and progress was quite erratic, considering the college workload, too. I had done some background work on GSoC and Wikimedia in late October, and had worked on setting up the environment in December. But most of my work truly started in late February, when I started taking up tasks and set about to submitting patches for them. In early March itself, I had decided upon a project - implementing Pywikibot support for an extension. John Vandenberg, my to-be mentor, had asked me to choose an extension - and I'd gone for Thanks[^8]. And he helpfully followed up by creating a detailed project task for the same - which I extended a bit and built my proposal around. By mid March - I had a few patches merged, and was figuring out the microtasks[^9] necessary for the project. Along with Python patches, I also had to work on patches involving Javascript and PHP, to prove competency for the same.

One of the things that I learned was that it is quite difficult to read and understand somebody else's code, and then figure out how to make changes to it. The code here was very neat, following PEP conventions, and was well documented[^10] - and it's creators were always a ping away on IRC. And yet, it proved to be very time-taking and complex to navigate through. One can only imagine how difficult it would have been, in organziations of such magnitude, to navigate through poorly structured or ill-documented code. This experience emphasised upon me the necessity of writing clean code myself, and creating documentation for the same - so that people after me wouldn't have a problem understanding my code. Open Source development, after all, is people working on other people's code. 

Another important thing that I'd learned was that the key to making it to GSoC was perseverance. There will be many times along the way when things seem too complex and frustrating, but you shouldn't give up and switch orgs. I needed the all-powerful sys-admins of my college to sort out the mess I'd created while putting up a wiki on my LAMP. I needed to go continually annoy my seniors (read Vivek) when I couldn't understand snippets of code. My mentor had openly reprimanded me on IRC when I missed tests before pushing patches. Each time I pushed a patch, a new error would pop up, and I would wonder if it could ever get merged. There were times when I used to reread a piece of documentation ten times over and still not understand what it meant. And when friends around me used to tell me of how their patches were going through smoothly, or how their chances looked amazing, it was very tempting to switch to an "easier" org. But I didn't, and am very glad of that in retrospect.

An acknowledgements section is overdue, and I'd like to thank Vivek Ghaisas once again. I wouldn't have thought about WMF without him, and I wouldn't have made it without him. Week after week, he'd open the door to his room at ungodly hours when I needed help, and oblige with a smile on his face[^11]. I'd also like to thank Sneha, who kept me motivated, and in touch with the light side of things as the workaholic in me juggled with all the serious things on my plate, and also for making sure I didn't drop grades due to attendance percentages or missed assignments. My mentor, John Mark Vandenberg ([@jayvdb](https://github.com/jayvdb) was extremely helpful, always available to give me quick feedback on my patches, or giving me directions for work. Also, thanks Mrinal, for keeping it calm all those times I freaked out. And thanks Saksham, for harping on about perseverance - that was simple but great advice.

Contributing to Open Source is fun, after a point. I was quite pleased, all along, of the fact that I was now 'working for' Wikimedia. The people here were very helpful and quite amazing. But most of all. the joy of seeing your own code in the midst of all that enormity, and watching other people use your code - that is an extremely rewarding experience.

Here's to a summer of code. Thanks for reading. 

---

[^1]: Read more about GSoC [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Summer_of_Code).
[^2]: My proposal was to implement Pywikibot support for the Thanks extension. Take a look at it [here](https://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T130585).
[^3]: Often, we get confused between Wikimedia, Mediawiki, Wikipedia. To get some clarity, take a look at [this](https://www.quora.com/What-are-the-differences-between-MediaWiki-Wikimedia-Wikipedia-and-wiki/answer/R-Shreevatsa) excellent Quora post.
[^4]: I used [Corkscrew](http://agroman.net/corkscrew/) for tunnelling and getting past this.
[^5]: More about Phabricator [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phabricator).
[^6]: Read more about nosetests [here](http://pythontesting.net/framework/nose/nose-introduction/).
[^7]: Read about Internet Relay Chat [here](http://www.ircbeginner.com/ircinfo/ircc-commands.html).
[^8]: More about the Thanks extension [here](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:Thanks).
[^9]: Each project needed some particular set of tasks to prove competency in the skills required to tackle the project. A set of pre-tests, if you may. These tasks preceding the project itself are known as microtasks.
[^10]: If you're interested, you could take a look at the documentation of Pywikibot [here](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:Thanks)
[^11]: A final link to [this](https://twitter.com/hbhyrava/status/706840770741809152) tweet _had_ to be included. It's an inside joke, don't worry if you don't get it. :P


