---
layout:     post
title:      GSoC - The End.
date:       2016-07-04 00:00:00
summary:    I've been failed by organisation in mid-term evaluations. It hasn't sunk in yet.
categories: GSoC Wikimedia
tags:
- gsoc
---

I wish I knew why.

No, not the reasons I've been given, not the litle code lapses that have been pointed out, not the politically correct comments. I wish I knew the real reasons. The real reasons why I was failed, the real reasons why the people involved wanted me out, why it was okay to pass some coders at 100 lines of simple code in one file submitted with not many questions asked, but why it was deemed necessary to fail me after my 450 odd lines of code which had been debated over and over again, why it happened that the 15,000 odd lines of non-coding work was ignored, why things I wasn't informed of were dug out and used against me, why the 60 hours of weekly work I was putting in, clearly evident, was considered insufficient, why my counter-arguments ignored and avoided, why something other experienced GSoCers around me, including those who have no reason to side with me, are outraged at my treatment and the decision, but the org thought it fine.

The mentors talked to the org admins and made their decision. The rest that followed was formality. I appeal against it. Mentor disagrees, the decision has been made. A senior member comes and defends his peers' decision based on their experience. Newbie org admins ignore arguments against the senior contributors and refuse to look at details. I spend a week, and create a detailed 27 page report with hundreds of links and images and a detailed analysis of each and every argument and counter argument. In less than a day, Google not only apparently look ats the entire code, the new environment and tries out my code, but also goes through all my links and counter-arguments and makes the decision not to overturn the decision of their valuable organisation friends at Wikimedia. Apparently, it could all be done in a day. Who knew, eh?

It's a script.

It's too blurry for me to go chasing conspiracy theories. And I don't have enough information to start pointing fingers, but some things were always expected. The org admins would obviously defend their senior members at Wikimedia. Google would obviously choose not to pay money wherever they can help it. It's all a formality. Fact is, the moment my mentor made the fail grade official, I never really stood a chance. 

All I know is this - the reasons quoted are invalid. They do not withstand a first round of scrutiny, it's a different matter that no one bothered to look at the first round of scrutiny. They are selective, seem surprisingly flimsy and are simply outrageous, once closely examined. I have checked multiple times, and I feel like I have a justifiable counter argument to each reason stated why. Details. Inconsequential details.

I feel extremely unfairly treated now. There's a lot of "hard-done by" feeling, there's a lot of resentment and anger, maybe even bitterness. I won't say anything more, now, I'd rather calm down and look at it all again in a month's time.

I had turned down _terribly tiny tales_, a chance to work for Chintan. I had kept aside the LTRC work for Dipti Ma'am. I might get fired from my post of Web Admin for inactivity. I'd turned down the chance to work on a research project, and I have disappointed Manish sir with lack of work, despite him promising me papers at the end of it. I didn't spend enough time with family. I cancelled my eight-year due trip to my dearest friends from school in Bengal. I missed IASNLP at IIIT. I missed summer school at IISc. My health is fucked, my sleep cycle is non existent, and I haven't had a break in five months, now. All in all, the worst summer of my life. Things are pretty fucked up. 

I'm almost numb with indifference, now. All that bothers me right now, however, is this. I wish I knew the real reasons why my organisation treated me the way they did. 

I guess I'll never know. And that's that.

***