---
layout:     post
title:      GSoC IV | Building a bot.
date:       2016-05-30 00:08:00
summary:    Here we first look at basic.py - a template for building bots, and then see how the said template is expanded upon in a bot called weblinkchecker.py.
categories: GSoC Wikimedia
tags:
- gsoc
---

Understanding these two scripts - the template `basic.py` and the bot `weblinkchecker.py` - would be helpful in building a bot in Pywikibot. I have taken the entire script for basic.py, broken it up into smaller parts for ease of explanation, adding comments after each part. Links and footnotes are also included in abundance.

Before starting, here's the directory structure of pywikibot:

    pywikibot
     __core
     __|__pywikibot
     __|__|__tools
     __|__|__|__ ...
     __|__|__pagegenerators.py
     __|__|__bot.py
     __|__|__ ...
     __|__scripts
     __|__|__basic.py
     __|__|__weblinkchecker.py
     __|__|__i18n
     __|__|__|__ *.json
     __|__|__ ...
     __|__ ...


**


## The Template | scripts/basic.py

The [git history](https://git.wikimedia.org/history/pywikibot%2Fcore.git/master) shows **@jayvdb, @xqt, @ricordisamoa, @valhallasw** are key contributors. Ping them on IRC at `#pywikibot` for help.


    #!/usr/bin/python
    # -*- coding: utf-8  -*-

 - _[UTF-8](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-8) is a compromise character encoding that can be as compact as ASCII (if the file is just plain English text) but can also contain any unicode characters (with some increase in file size). UTF stands for Unicode Transformation Format. The '8' means it uses 8-bit blocks to represent a character._
 - _This way of specifying the encoding of a Python file comes from [PEP 0263](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0263/)._

***

    """
    An incomplete sample script.

    This is not a complete bot; rather, it is a template from which simple
    bots can be made. You can rename it to mybot.py, then edit it in
    whatever way you want.

    Use global -simulate option for test purposes. No changes to live wiki
    will be done.

    The following parameters are supported:

    &params;

    -always           If used, the bot won't ask if it should file the message
                      onto user talk page.

    -text:            Use this text to be added; otherwise 'Test' is used

    -replace:         Dont add text but replace it

    -top              Place additional text on top of the page

    -summary:         Set the action summary message for the edit.
    """
    #
    # (C) Pywikibot team, 2006-2016
    #
    # Distributed under the terms of the MIT license.
    #

 - _Docstring is self-explanatory. ( I've covered these params in PAWS, btw )_
 - _What is meant by a 'live wiki'[^1] here? How does one determine which wiki we are talking about?_
 - _Which user talk page does the -always param refer to? [^2]._

***

    from __future__ import absolute_import, unicode_literals

    __version__ = '$Id: f616f822d07e32672f3a1d3c5ee2ffd3d616e011 $'
    #

 - _The `__future__` module is used to make functionality available in the current version of Python even though it will only be officially introduced in a future version. Read more [here](http://simeonvisser.com/posts/how-does-from-future-import-work-in-python.html)._
 - _`absolute_import` means that if I `import x`, Python will always look for a top-level `x` module, rather than `current_pkg.x`. Read more [here](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/33743880/what-does-from-future-import-absolute-import-actually-do/33744115#33744115)._
 - _I tried to understand what `unicode_literals` mean via links [here](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/23370025/what-is-unicode-literals-used-for/23370127#23370127) and [here](http://python-future.org/unicode_literals.html), but I am not sure what this means yet. [^3]._
- _According to **@valhallasw**, version Ids are generated with git pre/post hooks (read about git hooks [here](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Customizing-Git-Git-Hooks)), but apparently these are leftovers from SVN and serve no purpose anymore._

***

    import pywikibot
    from pywikibot import pagegenerators

    from pywikibot.bot import (
        SingleSiteBot, ExistingPageBot, NoRedirectPageBot, AutomaticTWSummaryBot)
    from pywikibot.tools import issue_deprecation_warning

    # This is required for the text that is shown when you run this script
    # with the parameter -help.
    docuReplacements = {
        '&params;': pagegenerators.parameterHelp
    }


        class BasicBot(
        # Refer pywikobot.bot for generic bot classes
        SingleSiteBot,  # A bot only working on one site
        # CurrentPageBot,  # Sets 'current_page'. Process it in treat_page method.
        #                  # Not needed here because we have subclasses
        ExistingPageBot,  # CurrentPageBot which only treats existing pages
        NoRedirectPageBot,  # CurrentPageBot which only treats non-redirects
        AutomaticTWSummaryBot,  # Automatically defines summary; needs summary_key
    ):


 - _See the difference between `from x import y` and `import x.y` [here](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/19668831/difference-between-from-x-import-y-and-import-x-y)._
 - _Refer to dir structure - the import statements will make sense. Here's the code to [pagegenerators.py](https://git.wikimedia.org/blob/pywikibot%2Fcore.git/master/pywikibot%2Fpagegenerators.py) and [bot.py](https://git.wikimedia.org/blob/pywikibot%2Fcore.git/master/pywikibot%2Fbot.py)._
 - _`pagegenerators.py` generate a page generator object that is iterable and that yields page objects on which other scripts can then work._
 - _`bot.py` provides user-interface related functions for building bots. Read about the generic bot classes there._
 - _Search for `parameterHelp` within pagegenerators.py to understand the arguments passed to the class BasicBot._

***

        """
        An incomplete sample bot.

        @ivar summary_key: Edit summary message key. The message that should be used
            is placed on /i18n subdirectory. The file containing these messages
            should have the same name as the caller script (i.e. basic.py in this
            case). Use summary_key to set a default edit summary message.
        @type summary_key: str
        """

        summary_key = 'basic-changing'

 - Look at scripts/i18n/basic/en.json to understand this doc string for the class BasicBot. Then look at the json files for the other languages to see similarities.

***

        def __init__(self, generator, **kwargs):
            """
            Constructor.

            @param generator: the page generator that determines on which pages
                to work
            @type generator: generator
            """
            # Add your own options to the bot and set their defaults
            # -always option is predefined by BaseBot class
            self.availableOptions.update({
                'replace': False,  # delete old text and write the new text
                'summary': None,  # your own bot summary
                'text': 'Test',  # add this text from option. 'Test' is default
                'top': False,  # append text on top of the page
            })

            # call constructor of the super class
            super(BasicBot, self).__init__(site=True, **kwargs)

            # handle old -dry paramter
            self._handle_dry_param(**kwargs)

            # assign the generator to the bot
            self.generator = generator

 - _Constructor method which initializes the bot. Sets params' default values._
 - _The super class, as mentioned in the class definition params, is SingleSiteBot. Refer to the class for the same in bot.py to understand the params and arguments._
 - _The _handle_dry_param checks for deprecated -dry argument, and takes necessary action._
 - _generator argument assigns given pagegenerator to the bot._


***

        def _handle_dry_param(self, **kwargs):
            """
            Read the dry parameter and set the simulate variable instead.

            This is a private method. It prints a deprecation warning for old
            -dry paramter and sets the global simulate variable and informs
            the user about this setting.

            The constuctor of the super class ignores it because it is not
            part of self.availableOptions.

            @note: You should ommit this method in your own application.

            @keyword dry: deprecated option to prevent changes on live wiki.
                Use -simulate instead.
            @type dry: bool
            """
            if 'dry' in kwargs:
                issue_deprecation_warning('dry argument',
                                          'pywikibot.config.simulate', 1)
                # use simulate variable instead
                pywikibot.config.simulate = True
                pywikibot.output('config.simulate was set to True')

- _Method to handle the deprecated -dry parameter. It sets -simulate instead._
- _Look at the method `issue_deprecated_warning` in pywikibot/tools/\_\_init\_\_.py. What is the purpose of depth here?_[^4]

***

        def treat_page(self):
            """Load the given page, do some changes, and save it."""
            text = self.current_page.text

            ################################################################
            # NOTE: Here you can modify the text in whatever way you want. #
            ################################################################

            # If you find out that you do not want to edit this page, just return.
            # Example: This puts Text on a page.

            # Retrieve your private option
            # Use your own text or use the default 'Test'
            text_to_add = self.getOption('text')

            if self.getOption('replace'):
                # replace the page text
                text = text_to_add

            elif self.getOption('top'):
                # put text on top
                text = text_to_add + text

            else:
                # put text on bottom
                text += text_to_add

            # if summary option is None, it takes the default i18n summary from
            # i18n subdirectory with summary_key as summary key.
            self.put_current(text, summary=self.getOption('summary'))

- Method to modify the current page. Retrieves options and data from the Options list. 

***

    def main(*args):
        """
        Process command line arguments and invoke bot.

        If args is an empty list, sys.argv is used.

        @param args: command line arguments
        @type args: list of unicode
        """
        options = {}
        # Process global arguments to determine desired site
        local_args = pywikibot.handle_args(args)

        # This factory is responsible for processing command line arguments
        # that are also used by other scripts and that determine on which pages
        # to work on.
        genFactory = pagegenerators.GeneratorFactory()

        # Parse command line arguments
        for arg in local_args:

            # Catch the pagegenerators options
            if genFactory.handleArg(arg):
                continue  # nothing to do here

            # Now pick up your own options
            arg, sep, value = arg.partition(':')
            option = arg[1:]
            if option in ('summary', 'text'):
                if not value:
                    pywikibot.input('Please enter a value for ' + arg)
                options[option] = value
            # take the remaining options as booleans.
            # You will get a hint if they aren't pre-definded in your bot class
            else:
                options[option] = True

        gen = genFactory.getCombinedGenerator()
        if gen:
            # The preloading generator is responsible for downloading multiple
            # pages from the wiki simultaneously.
            gen = pagegenerators.PreloadingGenerator(gen)
            # pass generator and private options to the bot
            bot = BasicBot(gen, **options)
            bot.run()  # guess what it does
            return True
        else:
            pywikibot.bot.suggest_help(missing_generator=True)
            return False

    if __name__ == "__main__":
        main()

 - _Read about `sys.argv` [here](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/4117530/sys-argv1-meaning-in-script)._
 - _What is the options variable here?[^5]_
 - _The method `handle_args`, defined in bot.py, is called in pywikibot/\_\_init\_\_.py. It handles standard command line arguments as Unicode literals, and return the rest as a list. Read about it [here](https://git.wikimedia.org/blob/pywikibot%2Fcore.git/master/pywikibot%2Fbot.py#L828)._
 - _Look at the code for pagegenerators GeneratorFactory [here](https://git.wikimedia.org/blob/pywikibot%2Fcore.git/master/pywikibot%2Fpagegenerators.py#L350). It processes command line arguments and generates corresponding page generators._


***

## An Example Bot | scripts/weblinkchecker.py

The bot weblinkchecker.py is used for checking external dead links found at the wiki. I am only posting the docstring for now, and will update with the comparisions to basic.py later on. Read the entire code [here](https://git.wikimedia.org/blob/pywikibot%2Fcore.git/master/scripts%2Fweblinkchecker.py).

    This bot is used for checking external links found at the wiki.

    It checks several pages at once, with a limit set by the config variable
    max_external_links, which defaults to 50.

    The bot won't change any wiki pages, it will only report dead links such that
    people can fix or remove the links themselves.

    The bot will store all links found dead in a .dat file in the deadlinks
    subdirectory. To avoid the removing of links which are only temporarily
    unavailable, the bot ONLY reports links which were reported dead at least
    two times, with a time lag of at least one week. Such links will be logged to a
    .txt file in the deadlinks subdirectory.

    After running the bot and waiting for at least one week, you can re-check those
    pages where dead links were found, using the -repeat parameter.

    In addition to the logging step, it is possible to automatically report dead
    links to the talk page of the article where the link was found. To use this
    feature, set report_dead_links_on_talk = True in your user-config.py, or
    specify "-talk" on the command line. Adding "-notalk" switches this off
    irrespective of the configuration variable.

    When a link is found alive, it will be removed from the .dat file.

    These command line parameters can be used to specify which pages to work on:

    &params;

    -repeat      Work on all pages were dead links were found before. This is
                 useful to confirm that the links are dead after some time (at
                 least one week), which is required before the script will report
                 the problem.

    -namespace   Only process templates in the namespace with the given number or
                 name. This parameter may be used multiple times.

    -xml         Should be used instead of a simple page fetching method from
                 pagegenerators.py for performance and load issues

    -xmlstart    Page to start with when using an XML dump

    -ignore      HTTP return codes to ignore. Can be provided several times :
                    -ignore:401 -ignore:500

    Furthermore, the following command line parameters are supported:

    -talk        Overrides the report_dead_links_on_talk config variable, enabling
                 the feature.

    -notalk      Overrides the report_dead_links_on_talk config variable, disabling
                 the feature.

    -day         Do not report broken link if the link is there only since
                 x days or less. If not set, the default is 7 days.

    The following config variables are supported:

    max_external_links        - The maximum number of web pages that should be
                                loaded simultaneously. You should change this
                                according to your Internet connection speed.
                                Be careful: if it is set too high, the script
                                might get socket errors because your network
                                is congested, and will then think that the page
                                is offline.

    report_dead_links_on_talk - If set to true, causes the script to report dead
                                links on the article's talk page if (and ONLY if)
                                the linked page has been unavailable at least two
                                times during a timespan of at least one week.

    weblink_dead_days         - sets the timespan (default: one week) after which
                                a dead link will be reported

    Syntax examples:
        python pwb.py weblinkchecker -start:!
            Loads all wiki pages in alphabetical order using the Special:Allpages
            feature.

        python pwb.py weblinkchecker -start:Example_page
            Loads all wiki pages using the Special:Allpages feature, starting at
            "Example page"

        python pwb.py weblinkchecker -weblink:www.example.org
            Loads all wiki pages that link to www.example.org

        python pwb.py weblinkchecker Example page
            Only checks links found in the wiki page "Example page"

        python pwb.py weblinkchecker -repeat
            Loads all wiki pages where dead links were found during a prior run

***

[^1]: 
[^2]: 
[^3]:
[^4]:
[^5]:
