---
layout:     post
title:      GSoC VII | Judgement Day
date:       2016-06-23 00:00:00
summary:    What I've learnt so far - thoughts and reflections before the mid term review.
categories: GSoC Wikimedia
tags:
- gsoc
---
At 00:30 IST, on the 28th of June, Google will make public the decision to either end my project, or pay me the biggest paycheck of my life so far to allow me to continue. As of today, as I type out the words into the midnight of the 23rd, _I am failing_. Close, but failing. And in a rare hour of reflectivity and introspection, I have decided to jot a few thoughts down on what I've learnt so far.

Edit: This part is being misquoted as accepting that I have failed, please read the rest of the post, too. For the record I finished the MVP within a day of this post, and three days before deadline. More on that legal complication after Google reviews my code.

***

## Let's read someone else's code.
The practice I improved on the most during these past two months is the art of reading others' code. It's all a bunch of lines of code you haven't seen before, in the end, and if you are someone who can read them and figure, by yourself, what's happening and what to do next, then you're in the right direction. During the course of my project, I've read a lot of code in both `mediawiki` and `pywikibot`, and I have changed from someone who was bamboozled by a new method to someone who intuitively follows an argument to a function across multiple files, from someone who raises his hands up at the first sign of an unknown python feature to someone who subconsciously googles up documentation and figures out the purpose of the implementation quickly. From someone whose bird's eye view was as limited as the scope of a method to someone who can keep a rough idea of the entire process workflow in his head.

It's like cricket - the more you practice reading the code, the better you get at understanding it. The longer and closer you spend your time with the code, the more the subtleties and designs which will start revealing themselves.

_I like reading Python code now, and am very comfortable with Pywikibot. It was a new scary place once, but now it feels like home._

***

## Get into the details.
My mentor is the first professional developer I have had such regular interactions with. Over the course of the project I couldn't help but notice some of his approaches to work - most notably his adherence to details. And this is something I noticed in the other elite developers whose code reviews I happened to chance upon, too. _They are all obssessed with the details._ This function will work better if we use this parameter instead, that list is unneccesary there, this test fails if we do not tweak the string, that function call should be better named, this line of log indicates an error in that file - my patchset had _20_ comments yesterday - in the middle of his vacation, a developer had sat down and devoted time to noticing _all the details_. 

Till before the project, I had been a shameless hacker - I just got code to work somehow by hacking an ugly way to it. And in the process, I used to ignore the details, as long as it works, who cares? Over the course of the project so far, I have been coerced, thankfully, to change that view. I _have_ to worry about the design of the code now, whether three lines of code could be implemented in one, checking my spaces and newlines, checking for unnecessary variables or over-complicated methods, researching features before implementing them, constantly looking for the better way of doing things, of looking at details to improve. 
I can no longer ignore aspects of my code which work now but may not later. I don't skip over errors lazily and ignore or patch them over. I like to think I am more focused and observant while reading and writing code, and that I am more meticulous and sincere in my work. 

_No detail is too small for a good developer, and I am slowly learning to be one._

Note: It is worth noting that missing a 'small' detail while writing my proposal and MVP is what may lead me to failing the mid-term review. If I had added in the clause "`+2` provided `jenkins` is up at least one week before the deadline", I would be certain of going through to the next round. Ah, irony, thou heartless bitch.

***

## Professionalism.

I have self-discipline issues. I don't stick to timelines, work only in random bursts of momentum, am poor with regular communication, and make careless but costly errors like messing up timezone calculations. I get work done, most of the time, but it's inconsistent and haphazard. All these things make for poor professionalism, and if you're a poor professional, you really can't learn or progress in these scenarios. During the course of this project, I have had some interactions which have brutally exposed the same, and left me embarrassed and apologetic, and forced me to improve.

In the last two and a half weeks, I have done most of the work I should have done in two months. The reason, more than the fear of failing, I'd like to think, is an improvement in professionalism. After each meet, I would sit down and write down the minutes of the meeting, and then make a list of things to do before the next meet, including a regular blog post. Then I would break down the work into the days before the next week, and get to them on time. I communicated regularly with my mentor, attended to each detail necessary, explored all options possible for finding a solution, and didn't get off my keyboard till a job was done. I had never done something like this before, and this approach worked wonders -from struggline to meet objectives consistently to receiving encouragement from my mentor in two and a half weeks. I just hope it isn't too late.

_Bottom line, I am learning how to be a professional._


***

## Interacting with fellow developers.

This is something I have acknowledged strongly, but not achieved. 

Each developer in an open source organisation is a resource pool of sorts - having knowledge of some code written by himself, some code used by himself, some code collaborated upon with others, some code he's raised bugs for and some code he can easily understand given his technical knowledge of the language or the practical knowledge of the codebase and it's workflow. And there are many such developers all across the world for Wikimedia, all active on IRC channels, all willing to share their enormous combined knowledge, _once the right sort of questions are asked._ 

Despite my mentor's urging, I hadn't initially spent too much time on the IRC channels, and I regret it, in retrospect. It is only of late that I have started asking questions on IRC, and even now I don't ask the right ones. If I happen to pass mid-term, or if I happen to contribute to open source over the next three long summers I have at college, my priority would be to improve my interactions with the enormous resource pool on these channels - finding the right channels for the right questions, knowing the right people for the right questions, and framing the right questions. I think it is an art, and I'd like to be good at it.

But probably the best way of interacting with other developers is via code. Quoting the minutes of my own meeting on 27th May, "One needs to look at others' code and spot errors and changes. This helps one get more familiar with other areas of the community when they do their research while responding to the patch, it helps the reviewer to learn when others review or reply to his review, it exposes one to new style of coding, and it also teaches the reviewer about the process of code-merging. Needless to say, it provides the person submitting the patch with feedback, and helps the community." And it helps interactions. You will remember the person who reviewed your code - I rememeber each one of them - and ones who've asked you to do the same.

_I need to utilize IRC channels and participate in code reviews._

***

## I like Pywikibot.

It is curious how we make choices. Choice of organization for open source, in this case.

I never looked through all my options before picking an organisation, and if polybuildr hadn't been contributing to Wikimedia last year, I would never have chosen this project. Of all the orgs, why Wikimedia? Why not the gigantic Python Foundation or one of its components? Why not Django? Why not poster-boy Mozilla? Why not the European usuals like CERN? I don't know things just turned out this way. I chose Wikimedia, and because I like Python more than PHP, I chose pywikibot.

And I like it. I am comfortable with the code now, I know some developers on here, pywikibot works with one of the biggest sites in the world, my changes will be used by a lot of other people, I'll learn all the things I've already mentioned in the sections above, and I can use my knowledge here in all the "Named Entity Linking to Wikipedia" projects at the NLP lab for my thesis. And oh, I might get to visit Wikimania someday. I hope this project continues, and that I do pass, because I'd like to continue contributing to Wikimedia in the near future.

There are a lot of extensions that need support, there are tests which can be fixed, features that can be implemented, bots to be created ( the concept of building a bot is fascinating. :D ), and I can tweak with new NLP functionalities. And I have three years, at least, before I get into the humdrum of post-college life.

_I like pywikibot, and if I do continue contributing to open source, it's going to be here._

***

But back to the moment. I have a patch to submit, a patchset to fix, and three and a half days left in order to meet MVP objectives. Lots of work.

I had named the blog post 'The First Judgement Day', initially. Then I changed it when I realized that unless I make it now, there will not be another. There is only one judgement day - let the afterlife be the afterlife, eh?

Here's to a great journey so far, and here's to the final charge before Google plays God.

***