---
title: Of Neighbours, Perches and Football.
author: sith_offside
layout: post
---

After surviving a late scare after a wonderful Erik Lamela volley, Liverpool have just walked off to a 2-1 win away at Tottenham, their fifth win in as many games in the 2018/19 season. They weren't the better side throughout the game - far from it, but just like in their 2-1 win against Leicester a couple of weeks ago, they were the better team when and where it counted. The likes of Milner, Wijnaldum, van Dijk and Robertson can now they can go back to their hotel rooms for a well deserved rest. Perhaps they'll switch on their TVs and hope that they can extend their lead at the top of the Premier League if Fulham manage something against the defending champions, Manchester City. 

As a Manchester United fan, there was nothing enjoyable in writing the previous few lines. There isn't much to enjoy when you look at your most bitter rivals battle it out for honours in the league and in the cups, while you sit at 10th in the table. And there isn't much to enjoy when your star players make headlines by flirting with other clubs, or when your club structure is in disarray, or when your expensive ensemble of sportsmen fizzle out in a damp squib game after game, or when your manager's style is more entertaining off the pitch than on it. As a United supporter, you just have to batten down the hatches and get ready for a bumpy ride. And hope that you won't wait for as long as Liverpool did (and are) before you win the league again. 

It gets a bit better (or worse, depending on your perspective) when you give in to the part of you that just loves a good story, irrespective of the jerseys involved. The Premier League is always a great spectacle, and this year, like the last, the big clubs like Manchester City, Liverpool and Chelsea _are_ playing lovely football. Throw in the ever increasing quality of the 'lower teams' like Fulham (who have a front three of Schurrle, Vietto and Mitrovic, with Jean Michael Seri behind them, and Sessgnon in reserve) or Watford (4 wins in 4, up against United), Wolves (how on earth did they get a player of Ruben Neves' quality?) - and as a neutral, it's just brilliant entertainment, a never ending soap opera that has it's viewers hooked on the to the drama and asking for more.

Will Unai Emery make a difference at Arsenal? Can we see the best of Ozil again? Is Richarlison the real deal at Everton? Is Marco Silva the next Mourinho after all? How good is Jamie Vardy when he doesn't have Mahrez feeding him? Is Iheanacho going to vindicate himself under Puel? How far along can Wilf Zaha pull the Eagles up the table, and how long will he stay there? Can new boys Cardiff make a mark for themselves? Can they survive the season? Why is Rafa Benitez still at Newcastle? What can he achieve for the faithful at St.James' Park? Ah, the drama will go on. Every time a question is answered, a new one will pop up in it's place.

And then there's the sheer love of football itself. The inexplicable joy you feel when you see the ball ripple the back of the net, and listen to the road of thousands of fans. Sitting thousands of miles away in different countries, different continents, football can unite us with the simplest of things. A nutmeg, a dribble. A dink past a defender, a deft drop of a shoulder. A half time equalizer, an extra time winner. A lung busting sprint, an arrogantly lazy flick. A last ditch tackle, a first time volley. A resolute will to doggedly defend, the unyielding drive to keep trying, the road of a home crowd, the taunts from the away fans, the slick movement of that one ball across a diagonal, down an alley, over a defence and under a wall. 

But I digress. The Premier League is a good saga, yes; football has been, is, and will remain lovely, yes; someone will win it and someone will no longer be in it, yes; and we're still United fans unable to digest the way we're lagging behind despite spending loads of money, watching our rivals get better and better while we are stuck in a quagmire of a musical chairs set up of managers, a flatter-to-deceive moments of turning-around-the-corner-and-this-could-be-it victories,  